Ultimate Guide to Camera Shots: Every Shot Size Explained [The Shot List, Ep 1]
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AyML8xuKfoc
Video ID: AyML8xuKfoc
Channel: StudioBinder
Uploaded: 2020-05-04   Duration: 763s
Transcript language: en-US   Source: manual captions
======================================================================

Films are made up of sequences. Sequences are made up of scenes. And scenes are made up of shots. But we must understand the characteristics
and storytelling value of each shot. "- Don't be a..." In this video, we will begin with
the big picture and work our way down. We're going to define
the essential shot sizes in a filmmaker's toolbox. And how to use the right shot at the right time to create memorable
moments on screen. This is episode 1
of "The Shot List". Shot size. Shot choices help
establish the rhythm. Tone. And meaning of a scene. Knowing which shot will
be the most aesthetically and dramatically valuable
for a given scene should be the highest priority for both a director and a DP. In this video, we'll be examining
essential shot sizes. As we go, we'll populate a
shot list in StudioBinder as a sort of cheat sheet the next time you
need create one. Now, let's get to the shots. The most common visual
element to open a scene or even an entire film is the Establishing Shot. ♪ ♪ It is typically wide enough
to establish the geography. Time of day. Show the scale of subjects in relation to
their environment. And is often used to
transition between scenes. With genres like
science fiction. Where entirely new world
need to be introduced, establishing shot is crucial. "Blade Runner 2049" opens with a series
of establishing shots. We get the first impressions
of near-future Earth with industrial and
futuristic farms outside the city. So remember, an establishing shot is a crucial introductory
component of any scene. It can mark a transition
to a new location. Or introduce crucial details about the location or world. The establishing shot
is often followed up with a Master Shot. Or simply The Master. Like the establishing shot a master shot
confirms the location and geography of the scene. It also clarifies which
characters are in the scene and where they are in
relationship to each other. "- Go sit down. Talk to each other. Hey, Mr. Einstein..." Here we see a master from
"The Godfather: Part II" framing the Corleone family
around a dinner table. "- Hey, Sally, get in here!" The majority of this scene is played in the master to emphasize the family's
close-knit relationship. "- Country isn't your blood. - I don't feel that way." Until Michael drops
some devastating news. "- Oh,
if you don't feel like that why wouldn't you quit
college and go join the army! - I did. I've enlisted in the Marines." "- Micky, wow,
why didn't you come to us. - I mean, Pop had to put all the
strings to get you a deferment. - I didn't ask for it. - I didn't ask for a deferment.
I didn't want." But it also helps make Michael
split from the family visual. From this... ...to this. And we feel the
emptiness around him that much more. Remember,
the master captures the scene playing out in its entirety providing the editor with
something to cut out to, if necessary. Moving on. Wide Shot (WS) "- Let me tell you
about my book." ♪ ♪ The wide shot positions
subjects far from the camera to visually represent their
relationship to their environment. This is distinct from
the establishing shot, which is about location. The wide shot is
principally concerned with the scale of the subject. "- I'm finished." It can be used when you need
to make subjects appear lost. Lonely or overwhelmed. Or comment on a
subject's relationship to their environment. In this wide-shot
from "Phantom Thread" we can see the characters,
Alma and Reynolds dwarfed by a messy ballroom. Paul Thomas Anderson
could have ended the scene with close-ups to capture
their character's emotions. But by ending with
a wide shot here, we can consider Alma
and Reynolds together yet isolated from the
world around them. Use it when you
need to establish the spatial relationships
of the subjects. Make statements using
distance, depth or size. Our next subject. Full Shot (FS) When a subjects entire body reaches from the top to the
bottom edges of the frame the shot is defined as full. With a full shot, it's not necessary to put the
subject in the center of the frame, but notice how often
this is the case. This example is effective because it is tight
enough to tell a story with the character's face but wide enough to
further the story by observing her entire
body, posture, and wardrobe. So remember a full is
composed head to toe and you can use them
when you need to make statements about
a subject's physicality and present a character
in all their glory. Moving on. Medium Full Shot (FS) / Cowboy. The medium full shot is arranged
from the top of the subject's head to just below their waist. It is sometimes referred
to as a Cowboy Shot based on the height
of gun holsters. Here we can see
complementary angles from "The Favorite" composed in medium fulls. The cowboy angle on the
character Lady Sarah is particularly strong
and confrontational. This isn't a western and features no holsters, but it's hard not
to think of cowboys when firearms are
deployed like this. Use it when you need
to present a subject as confident,
dangerous or confrontational. Especially when
weapons might be drawn. Moving on. Medium Shot (MS) Perhaps the most
popular shot size in all of cinema is the medium shot. But why? Because it's more
of a neutral shot. Neither dramatic like a close-up or distancing like a wide shot. It captures the subject in a size similar to how we interact with people. "- Would you hold still?" The typical composition
of a medium shot starts above the waist, but below the chest and ends just above the head. Shot sizes deployed
in animated films function under the same
compositional rules. "- Oh. - Hello." Let's look at an example
to better illustrate this. In this scene from "Coco" Miguel watches a film
starring his idol. The medium shot composition accommodates quite a bit. The props from Miguel shrine. The detail on the TV screen and Miguel's reactions to it. It's an intimate moment as we observe Migel's joy. Along with the object
of his affection in a single frame. So remember, the typical
composition of a medium shot starts above the waist but below the chest and ends just above their head. Use it when you need to dig into a subject size without losing their
physicality or environment. Or utilize a true
middle-ground approach that is neither jarring nor especially dramatic. Our next subject. Medium Close Up Shot (MCU) When a shot frames a
subject from mid-chest to just above their head, it is referred to as
a medium close-up. Medium close-ups are
about reducing distraction and prioritizing story
and character details. "- Why don't you start right now
and get the fuck out of here?" Use it when you need to
get intimate with a subject without losing
their physicality. "- Perhaps I treated
you too harshly." Here the villainous Thanos snaps his fingers during the climatic moments
of "Avengers: Endgame". With this shot size we have room for the
infinity gauntlet. And Thanos's look of
cruel satisfaction in thinking, he is one. But when he fails, this medium close-up is designed to also
capture his reaction. Remember, a medium close-up is roughly head to chest. Are you ready for it? It's the Close Up (CU) Of course, the most powerful visual weapon for
highlighting a change in emotion or dramatic beat on screen. Close-ups are most often
arranged at eye level better to dig into the
windows of the soul. In this shot size, we have a front-row seat for a character's
thoughts and feelings. "- Who is it?" "- Will you help me? - Yes, anything." The close-up is about empathy and illustrates how
dramatically effective it can be in a time of
decision or anxiety. Our final category. Extreme Close Up Shot (ECU) An extreme close up or ECU frames a subject to
isolate a specific area. This could be
lips, ears or nose, But the eyes are
typically the focus. Like here in "Kill Bill Vol. 1". As the Bride is swarmed
by the Crazy 88, we cut back and forth
between their entry points and her frantic eyes. But when the function
of a specific prop or an intimate
detail is necessary filmmakers will often
rely on the insert shot. Inserts are most commonly used to highlight and isolate something
crucial to the narrative. So remember, an extreme close-up or an insert shot is one of the greatest
tools for emphasis. It is the most intimate,
dramatic and potentially startling of all shot sizes. So this is our shot list made
in StudioBinder's so far. It has all of the most common
shot sizes you can reference the next time you need
to create a shot list. You can find a link to the full
shot list in the description. If you're looking for shot listing
software to automate the process check the description for
a link to StudioBinder. It's free to get started. In the next episode
of this series, we'll explore framing
and composition. Subscribe to our channel. Click the bell to
stay in the loop. And happy shot listing.
