Ultimate Guide to Scene Transitions – Every Editing Transition Explained [The Shot List, Ep 9]
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TKXBAaQB03U
Video ID: TKXBAaQB03U
Channel: StudioBinder
Uploaded: 2021-11-29   Duration: 1168s
Transcript language: en-US   Source: manual captions
======================================================================

Films are made up of sequences. Sequences are made up of scenes. And scenes are made up of shots. In the previous episodes, we analyze frame rate. Camera lenses. Shot size, and more. Now, let's talk about how
the scenes are connected with scene transitions that move us through the story. "- See if you
remember anything." This is episode 9
of "The Shot List". Editing transitions. We'll be examining 9
essential editing transitions each with their own function. We'll begin with the
most fundamental. "- I want a little production
value, you know? Like some editing, transition
something, some music." - And work our way
to the more complex. "- Excuse me. - Excuse me." - As we go, we'll populate
a shot list in StudioBinder as a sort of guide for the next time you were
looking for the perfect transition. Before we dive into
creative transitions, we first have to mention
the most basic technique. The cut. A cut is an instant
switch or transition from one shot to another. "- Who is it, Jay? - It's okay, honey.
It's a friend of Terry's." - Or one scene to the next. And it is by far the most common
way to transition between scenes. In our next episode, we'll dive
deeper into the nuances of the cut and how different editors use it to
enhance the storytelling of a scene. "- The way we cut
that. If you look at that sequence, you'll see,
it's very, jaggedly cut. In order to accentuate the
violence of the breaking of the glass." - Now, let's look at our
first creative transition. The Fade. One of the original editing transitions
that is still used today is the fade. A fade is when a shott
dissolves to, or from a solid color. Usually black or white. A fade from black is a
common way to open a film as it eases the audience
into the beginning of the story. "- Blake. - Sorry, serge. - Pick a man. Bring your kit. Yes, serge." - A fade to black can give a
gradual sense of closure at the end, like opening and closing a book. But what about fades
in the middle of a film? "- And you will know
my name is the law. When I lay my
vengeance upon thee." - This is similar to
the end of a chapter. A fade to black deliberately
pauses any momentum giving the audience
a moment to breathe or reflect on what
just transpired. "Pulp Fiction" uses the fade to
black between all three of its chapters. Editors can also fade-in and out of shots within the same scene
as a stylistic choice. This is also known
as dip to black as we can see
here in "Gone Girl". "- It's not good enough for you?
- It's not even close. What scared me
wasn't that he'd push me. What scared me was how
much he wanted to hurt me more. What scared me was
that I'd finally realized I am frightened of
my own husband." - A much less common type
of fade is the fade to white. Most commonly used to represent
a character entering a dream. Or dying. In contrast to black,
a fade to white can also leave an ending
up for interpretation. "- Let's go get some
help! Go get some help! - Now, it's perfect." - In this final scene
from "Black Swan", a fade to white does not
create a sense of closure but rather ambiguity. Does Nina die or not? If you want to fade into
another shot rather than to black opt for our next
transition - the Dissolve. "- Nice dissolve." - Like the fade, the dissolve
utilizes a gradual transition. Only this time it transitions
directly into another shot. Traditionally dissolves are used to suggest
a longer passage of time between scenes or shots within the same scene more than we'd expect
from a simple cut. "- God put this here
for me, ain't you. Take advantage,
man. Take advantage." - Or as a way to
signal a memory. Or a dream. "- What's going on?" - Some filmmakers
utilize the dissolve to create a hybrid moment
between the two scenes. When two shots
dissolve into each other, they create a third shot in which both shots are shown
within the frame simultaneously. This is known as
superimposition. In this editing transition
from "The Godfather II", we dissolve from a shot of Michael
Corleone to a shot of his father. This dissolve creates a comparison between
them and the parallels of their lives. Another type of transition that
draws connections between two shots in a less gradual
way is the match cut. "- Scott!
- What!" A match cut is any transition audio or visual that uses
elements from the previous scene to batch similar
elements in the next. These could be shapes. Compositions. Colors. Movement. Or sound. Unlike the gradual dissolve, a match
cut connects the two shots instantly. This connection can subconsciously
cause the audience draw on similarities or differences
between the scenes. A match cut can also
bridge time and space like in Kubrick's iconic
match cut from "2001". When match cutting between faces the assumption is that
we're seeing the same person at two points in their lives. In this scene from
"Pirates of the Caribbean", a large jump in time is bridged
together by a match cup. This match car accomplishes
story and character beats at once. It lets us know that this
is the same character that we're now years
ahead in the story. And that Elizabeth is still
fascinated with pirates. The combination of a match cut and
a dissolve becomes a match dissolve. This type of transition fulfills all
the same functions as a match cut, but smooth over the abrupt cut. We still get the
progression of time or create meaningful
connections. In "Toy Story 2", Jesse is beaming
with light and love for her owner Emily. And we know this because her
face matched dissolves into the sun. Next up, an old-fashioned technique
that used to be created in-camera. The Iris. In the early days, iris
transitions were a manual effect achieved by opening or closing a camera's
iris or aperture. The Iris transition was
commonly used like a fade in early cinema to
open or close a film. The Iris has since
become rather outdated. However, in modern cinema, some filmmakers
use the iris as a more stylistic choice. It's a great way to focus
on a specific element. A visual technique
similar to a zoom-in that focuses the entirety of the
scene on a single emotion or idea. Consider this moment
from "The Departed". Colin Sullivan has just
graduated from police academy and being promoted to detective. Watch how Scorsese and his editor
Thelma Schoonmaker visualize this moment. Colin is framed as
tiny and insignificant. Just another
anonymous individual. But then the iris opens up to reveal
the massive police headquarters and the power that has
now been granted to him. The world is literally
opening up for him. "- Congratulations on
passing the detectives exam and welcome to the
Special Investigation Unit. - Whoop-de-f*cking-do." - While the iris transition
uses a circular shape our next transition also
uses lines and shapes to switch between shots. A wipe transition is when shot a is
replaced with shock B as it moves or wipes into frame from a specific
direction like up, down, left, right. Or diagonal. Perhaps most notably the wipe transition is
used throughout the "Star Wars" franchise. "- This is madness." - Which itself is a tribute to
the "Flash Gordon" serials and Kurosawa films
like hidden fortress that inspired
Lucas's space opera. Wipes can also come from
various shapes, such as a star. "- Okay. From here we star wiped to
a glamour shot of Flint paying his bills. Then we start our wipe
to Flanders brushing his... - Dad, there other wipes
besides star wipes." - Or clock. "- My goal is to throw
for 4,000 or 5,000. Whichever comes first. - Better get ready to be
famous Albuquerque". Like the iris, wipe transitions
are a bit old-fashioned but will be ideal if your goal is a
more vintage look. "- You and your business. Call me now." - A wild and expressive musical like "The Rocky
Horror Picture Show" uses a variety of wipes that blend seamlessly
into its campy aesthetic. "- It's just a jump to the left. With your hands on your hips. It's just a jump to the left." - These days, most wiped
transitions are used ironically for purely comedic purposes, but the concept has
evolved into our next option, the passing transition. The passing transition
or pass-by effect has a moving character or object
to transition to the next scene. Or it has the camera itself move past the object. Edgar Wright and his editors have
nearly perfected the pass-by effect. These transitions often paired
with strategic sound design, the momentum between
scenes never skips a beat. "- Oh, man. This
is going to suck. - At least this will give us
something to complain about." - Also known as
a mass transition these are more seamless
than the traditional wipe. Parsing transitions are
often used to hide the cut. And they can be used to
add a hyper-stylized aesthetic. Another great editing technique that can add energy
to your transitions is the whip pan. A whip pan or swish pan is a quick horizontal
camera rotation that blurs the image. While it is commonly
used mid-scene, it can also be used
as a scene transition. Which can be highly advantageous
when you want to sustain momentum from the previous scene. Consider this montage
in "Boogie Nights". "- Perfect timing." - As the characters fly through a rapid
succession of scenes, fueled by drugs. "- What the f*ck
took you so long?" - Simply cutting between these scenes
wouldn't give us the dizzying effect that accentuates their
hectic mental state. If you are looking for rather
abrupt editing transition, rather than something smooth, look no further
than the smash cut. A smash cut is a shot abrupt
cut from one scene to another using high contrast in
both visuals and audio. "- That's a good pic. Put that f*cking
money on the counter. Give me the real stuff. Don't
give me the f*cking fake stuff." - This can be
between quiet and loud. "- Little men. I get
the watch to you." Between chaotic and still. "- Take the couple of cops." - Smash cuts are
typically used to shock or jot the audience like in "The Shining". "- I didn't thing this is
going to be this big, did you? - No." - A very common application is when a
character startles awake from a dream like here in "Shutter Island". Smash cuts are also commonly
used for comedic effect. Transitioning between
two contrasting scenes is a great way to
punctuate a moment. "- Hey, could I use your
guys's phone for a sec?" - The smash cut uses both
visuals and audio while transitioning. As do our final techniques,
J-cuts and L-cuts. There are two primary types of audio
transitions, the J cut, and the L cut. These terms derived from
the way the edit looks like a J. Or an L within an
editing timeline. A J cut or pre-lap is when the audio
of the next scene proceeds the image. In other words, the audience
hears the audio from scene B while still seeing scene A. "- Seven.
- Dad! - Six. Five, main
engine start, four... Three. Two. One. Booster ignition and..." - J-cuts are commonly
used in dialogue, but they can also be used when
transitioning to a flashback or memory such as in this scene
from "Saving Private Ryan". Before we see
images of Normandy, we hear the waves
crashing on the beach, creating a bridge to the past. But with an L-cut, the audio
from a proceeding scene carries over into
the following scene. This is often
used for narration. "- Our thankfulness to the escape
of our army must not blind us to the fact of what has happened in France
and Belgium is a colossal military disaster. We must expect another blow
to be struck almost immediately. The real power of
J-cuts and L-cuts are how they can create new
context using sound and image. Sound A plus image B creates a
more complicated and nuanced meaning. "- We shall fight with growing
confidence and growing strength in the air. Until in God's good time. the New World, with
all its power and might, steps forth to the rescue
and the liberation of the old. So these are the most
commonly used editing transitions. But they aren't the
only options available. You could use a push transition. A zoom. A luma key. A barrel roll. "- Oh, hi, Mark." There are endless
options available. "- Hi, doggy." What transitions
did we leave out? What are your favorites? Let us know in the comments. In the description, you'll
find a link to this full shot-list and storyboard in StudioBinder. Knowing what transitions you have
at your disposal and how they work will help you create momentum, make
connections, and keep the audience engaged. In the next episode of this series,
we'll explore the most fundamental editing techniques
used within a scene and how nuanced
a simple cut can be to tell a cohesive
and immersive story. See you in the next episode.
