Production Design in Film — The Underrated Role Explained
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=83hYhbknuJc
Video ID: 83hYhbknuJc
Channel: StudioBinder
Uploaded: 20250908   Duration: 1102s
Transcript language: en   Source: auto-captions
======================================================================

[Music] Oh my god. >> Films are made up of sequences. Sequences are made up of scenes and scenes are made up of shots. In previous episodes, we covered composition, animation, and sound. In this episode, we will dive into the world of production design. You walk onto these sets and it instantly just brings a smile to your face. [Music] This is episode 19 of the shot list production design. Before we start building sets, subscribe to Studio Binder and enable notifications to check out each of our new videos. Now, open your lookbooks to page one. Production design refers to the physical appearance of a film world. It establishes location and time period and deeply influences tone, mood, story, and character. The field is massively important to how a film looks. And yet, it is often underdised and appreciated. Production designer Rick Carter explains his job. >> It's not something that people who don't make movies really can see. you can hear about it and it's kind of interesting to see a set we built. You go, "Yeah, yeah, but what's who's in it? What's it about?" That's all you want to know. And so our job, at least my job and the art department is to explore a subject, make it as rich and detailed and authentic as possible and somebody that the director and the actors and the cinematography can all work with in order to create something that's an illusion that you believe. The credit production designer was first given to William Cameron Mingis during his work on Gone with the Wind, but production design existed long before filmmakers borrowed heavily from the production design strategies developed in theater in order to create convincing cinematic worlds. Today, production design can take many different forms. From the detailed construction of elaborate sets to the utilizing of real locations or building out CG landscapes, production design is handled by the art department which is overseen by the production designer who works closely with the director and cinematographer to decide on and create the look of a film. The goal of a production designer is to create a believable world. This doesn't mean it needs to be realistic, but rather the perfect setting for the story that is being told, one that is immersive and situates an audience within the narrative. And the first step to achieving this goal is research. A production designer's vision for a film's visual doesn't come out of thin air. First, a PD will do their own breakdown of the script. They will note locations whether they are interior or exterior, props, mention of set decoration, vehicles, and general indications of mood. After this close reading, the production designer will talk with the director to make sure they are both on the same page about the film's look. Conversations will also likely happen with the film's producer, who can give the PD guidance on their budget and other limitations. With this information, a production designer will then dive into extensive research, often creating mood boards that encapsulate their desired aesthetic. A PD can pull inspiration from just about anywhere. Photography, paintings, architecture, books, and other films may all appear on a mood board. For period films, the research is often even more demanding. Production designer Katherine Martin explains how she approached her work on The Great Gatsby. There will be a slew of research done on who the author is, the context of the world, the period in which the book is setting, whether it's actually reading academic treaties, novels, looking at pictures in libraries, going to libraries, borrowing books, going online, actually physically scouting locations that existed in the period or possibly were references for Fitzgerald. As the moot board is compiled, a production designer may work with a concept artist to create key frame illustrations, drawing some important settings. With materials assembled to guide the overall look of the film, it is time to begin figuring out how to achieve it. This often begins with location scouting. Welcome to Jurassic Park. Great production design can often boil down to choosing a great location. Often the easiest way to create a believable world is to shoot in a real location. For this reason, production designers can be an integral part to the location scouting process. The goal, of course, is to find the right setting for specific scenes, but PDs also usually have to consider logistical factors as well. Production designer Jack Fisk discusses his approach to location scouting for the Revenant. >> I know that every location that I find, the primary view will be south or toward the sun. Uh we shoot everything back lit. I know that on interiors, I need one source of light. If there's more than one source, he's going to block it out. Locations are rarely perfect as is. And so production designers often need to find a space with the potential to fit a scene. For a period piece in New York, for example, a PD may look for a street that has as little modern architecture as possible and then set about planning how they will further dress the street to look of a different time. It turns out that this side of the river, particularly Ooken, New Jersey, looks more like New York did than New York does now. Typically, a location scout or locations manager will then be the one to negotiate the logistics with the owner of a space, ensuring the art department can do what they need to it in order to achieve their vision. Sometimes the line between real location and studio is blended. >> Good news, the witch. She's dead. In Wicked, for example, production designer Nathan Crowley used a real location where he planted 9 million tulips and combined it through CGI with the built set of Munchkin land. >> As they run from this landscape here, they appear here. And that is the link. I've got a great mixture here of imagery, both real CGI. And that's where we started. Sometimes a film calls for a location that needs to be built. This is where set design comes in. Before a set is built, it needs to be designed. The production designers have their vision for the set, which is typically represented in their mood boards and concept art. These concepts will then be handed over to the art director. The art director is second in command in the art department and they oversee the process of making the PD's vision a reality, managing the logistics of creating the visuals. Production designer Janine Apawal describes the role. >> Art directors in general are working for and alongside production designers. We basically hire them to help us execute what has to be executed. >> The art director with the help of the set designer often creates 3D models of a location so that the PD director and cinematographer can see how a set will look before they break ground. After these designs are approved, they'll be translated to blueprints. When designing a set, emulating the production designer's vision is paramount. But other technical considerations need to be made as well. For example, where will lights be placed in the set? How will the camera move through it? Production designer Adam Stockhousen discusses how he approaches planning sets for Wes Anderson's Asteroid City. >> Part of that sort of forensic process of studying what exactly we need for each shot um involve figuring out how the thing comes apart. The sides were made on hinges to open up. The whole thing has a steel skeleton to hold it together as the various component parts of it pop and move away. The window frames all remove very quickly. I think it's very normal to be making sets that float and break apart. >> What was that? Another atom ball test. With the set designed, it must then be built. Depending on the scope of the project, the construction of a set can be a massive operation. It can involve construction coordinators, carpenters, scenic painters, plasterers, sculptors, and riggers who specialize in large structures or flying elements. Like with almost every element of filmm, how a set is built is a balance between aesthetic demand and logistical limitations. In the end, a set is made to service the film's objectives, not to be a complete structure or monument that stand the test of time. For example, if a film takes place in a few rooms in a house, the set built may just be those few rooms individually rather than an entire house. And those rooms may not even have four walls. Even so, on larger films, sets can become sprawling. Dennis Gastner describes the set building process on Bladeunner 2049. >> It was an arduous build because we built everything. Everything was uh built in obviously some way there tremendous amount of obviously the actors with the physical sets there were we did miniatures and wed in New Zealand. Uh we use all the tricks. >> Jack Fisk meanwhile is famous for building out sets as they would have been built in the time they depicting. He explains his approach. >> I build sets as real as possible. So when a cinematographer or director want to shoot 360, it's it's welcomed, you know, because I want to build the whole set, you know. I don't want to build a wall here and a wall there. Although I like the magic of cinema. Uh my magic is that I can usually do stuff cheaper than anyone else by building it real. After the long and hard work of building a set, it must be decorated. Set decoration is crucial to production design. The process is led by the set decorator who sources and places the materials within the set. This job requires intense attention to detail as well as a keen sense of the story being told since often how a space is decorated can affect a scene's mood and deliver important pieces of information. Bella is an adult, but she needed sort of soft corners and things that she couldn't hurt herself on. So, her room is incredibly soft and very beautiful. >> Set decorator Lorie Gaffin explains her role. >> The psychology of each character that's written, how they live, where they live, what they do. You have to do tremendous research to create that character, and it's not always in the script. The goal of a set decorator is to make a space feel real and lived in. This includes finding furniture, wall decor, textiles, and surface clutter like dishes, books, and trash. And of course, their role isn't limited to built sets. A set decorator is vital to transforming existing locations to fit a film's needs. Decorators are typically aided by set dressers who are tasked with physically installing all of the decorations. Set dressers are also present during production so that if any decorations are altered or moved during or between takes, they can reset them to maintain continuity. These decorations, however, are not to be confused with props. A prop, short for a property, is an object that is used by an actor during a scene. This differentiates it from a decoration, which is not directly engaged with by an actor. Props are overseen by the propmaster, who ensures they are ready and maintained throughout a shoot. Like with decorations, a prop can tell an audience a lot of information. Say you're sourcing a stuffed animal prop for a character. Is it worn down and dirty? Or is it brand new? Is it cute or menacing? Often a production will have several copies of props in case one is damaged. Once we produce a wand for a character, we have to produce at least six. And if you take like Daniel's one or Harry's wand, we've probably produced over 70 80 of those at least because he wears them out. Other elements of production design that actors are intimately acquainted with are costumes and makeup. Costumes are overseen by costume designers, but because they are integral to the overall look of a film, a production designer will often ensure they are in line with the rest of the pallet. Costume designers and PDs will often work in tandem to create outfits and sets that complement each other, making sure both elements are conveying the same time period and mood and don't have textures or colors that clash. Each time I showed director Bong any sort of saturated color, he wanted more gray in the overall crew and work. So, we went with this color stacking theme of gray on gray. It's really unusual to deliberately do that. That can be like a moment of complete horror on a set when everybody arrives wearing the color of the sofa. But in our film, that was very deliberate. >> The same goes for characters hair and makeup. If a set is gothic and grayscale, for example, hair and makeup may work to bring that same tone to the actor. Most production designers are more handsoff with costumeuming and makeup. Perhaps giving the heads of the respective departments guidance, but letting them then experiment creatively within those aesthetic parameters. >> What is this material? I love it. >> C. I think all of these elements from location to makeup need to be cognizant of color. A film's color palette and how it changes from scene to scene is largely dictated by production design. Pieces of set decoration, costumeuming, and more are carefully thought out on their own terms. But they also need to come together to create a cohesive mix of color. Color is not just an aesthetic consideration. It can symbolize an idea or emotion, direct attention, and can enhance mood. Production designers may put together swatch boards of colors they want to be present throughout the mison sen and they will work closely with a cinematographer to decide on how coloring will be utilized and captured. Of course, a film doesn't need to have just one color palette. If done deliberately, it can change and evolve from scene to scene. Production designer Dante Ferreti discusses how color on the Aviator evolved with the DP shooting choices. The first period it's only two colors. Forget the blue because the blue became green. When I start to print in techni color, it became much uh sharp the color very rich. So if you see the coconut grove in the first period in the 30, it's completely different if you see in the 40. Today, physical elements on set are often only one piece of a production designer's job. There are also VFX. It can be expensive to build massive sets and sometimes it can be impossible to accomplish what a story demands practically. This is where digital effects are used. Much of the VFX designing process is similar for a PD, starting with mood boards and research, then illustrations and more detailed planning. The production designer will work closely with VFX teams to ensure that built sets blend seamlessly with digital environments. Rick Carter explains >> often into post I'm called in not on full time all the time but a lot of the to go all the way through to make sure the look that we've established in the beginning is being carried over and and that the ideas are still there and not kind of put through so many different people that you lose, you know, sight of what's important. Production designers in their art departments may not get as much attention as directors or even cinematographers, but their role is integral to the final look of a movie. After all, a shot can only look as good as what's in it. Great production design means a lot of planning. Get started with Studio Binder pre-production services, which include software for mood boards and storyboarding. [Music] Until next time, good luck building your next world. [Music] Hey. [Music]
